In this video, we're going to look at
python generators and generator
functions. Now because one of the
advantages of generators is that they
save memory - and actually a lot of memory
in many cases - I'm going to start by
showing how we can check how much memory
things use in Python. So go ahead and
create a new project, and I'm going to
call mine, after I select the relevant
things, I'm going to call it gen
example. Let's make sure, in my case, is in
the right place, and then I'm going to
open a new file, or rather create a new
file, and then I'm gonna call this one sizes.py.
So let's go ahead and type in some code.
We'll start by typing import sys, and on
line three big_range is equal
to range and a thousand in parentheses.
Then line five I'm gonna do a print
parentheses double quotes and big
underscore range is, left and right curly
braces, space, bytes then a dot format. Then
within parentheses sys.getsize
of, and then we type in big underscore
range, cos that's what we want to get the
size from. Alright and that's the size
before we've actually got some data in
it. Now what we're going to do is, on line
seven, we're going to create a list
containing all the values. So create a
list containing all the values and we're
going to put in big_range. So
I'll start off by initializing, so big
underscore range equals, then left and right
square brackets, and I'm going to type in
for space val space in big underscore
range : and there's going to be big
underscore list dot append val, and
actually that should have been big
underscore list because we're using the
range that we've defined on line three,
and we're creating this list which is
containing all those values in that
range, like so. And the last thing we'll
do is, let's just print out the size of
the list. So we'll do a print parentheses
double quote, double quotes rather,
big_list is, then left and right
curly braces, then bytes then dot format.
And this time we're going to sys dot getsizeof,
and unsurprisingly big underscore
list this time. So there's our program. So
the code itself creates two
objects. We've got big underscore
range, and that's a range that returns the
numbers from 0 to 999, and it's not
really that big a range but it'll do for
our purposes here, to demonstrate the
memory usage. You can make it bigger if
you want, but wait until we run this
program before using a larger number.
Now big_list, on the other
hand, that object that is created by
pending all the values from the big
underscore range into a list, and you can
see the list being initialized on line 8.
Then we're then using the get sizeof
function, in both cases from the
sys module, to see how much memory each
object uses. So if we actually run this,
we should find that they occupy 48
bytes. The range itself, as you
can see, occupies 48 bytes and the big
underscore list, though, you can see
that's taking up nearly 9 kilobytes,
9k to store exactly the same values.
So I'll just move this down so I can get
a better view down the bottom there. If
we go ahead and change and add an extra
0 to the range, up here on line 3, and
then run it again, you can see in this
case, the range itself is still only 48
bytes but the list now is around 87K.
Hopefully there, you can see why I
suggested you wait before changing the
actual numbers and values in the range. If
you make it too big you could eat up all
your computer's memory. Now I should
mention, at this point, that this isn't a
very pythonic way of doing this, and you'd
probably use the list function itself to
convert the range to a list, but I wanted
it to be obvious what we're doing, which
is why this code loops through the
values in the range and appends each one
to the list. So what's actually going on
here and how is there such a big difference
in the memory that the two objects are
usingm which actually store exactly
the same set of numbers. Well both big
underscore range and big underscore list
are actually iterators, so we can use
either in a for loop to iterate over all
the values. Now big_range is a
special case of an iterator called a
generator, and in fact, we can run our own
version of big_range. So
I'm going to go ahead and do that
and I'm going to call it my underscore
range. I'm going to go ahead up here
and start typing this code on line four.
So I'm going to define a function, so def
my underscore range, and in parentheses n
colon and then int, colon on the end. Then we
can have start equals zero while start
is less than n colon, then we're going
to do yield - type in the word yield - space
start, then start space plus equals 1.
Then what we're going to do then is, we're
going to comment out this next line, this
big_range that was hard coded,
and we're going to change that to big
underscore range is equal to my
underscore range, and we're going to use
the same number ten thousand. So we're
going to call the function that we've
created. So let's go ahead now and run
the program again, noting the previous
values that we had down here, and you can
see in this case big underscore range
is now 88 bytes, and it may be 72
bytes - or it's actually between 72
to 88 bytes, depending on the
Python implementation. Point is, though,
it's different to 48 but it's still a
vast improvement over 8k, and that's
because, in this case of course, we've
written our own range instead of using
the built-in one. Alright, so I think I've
made the point about the memory
requirements, so I'm going to reduce the
range to just 5, otherwise I'm going to
spend most of the time scrolling
through thousands of lines of output
that we're going to add. So I'm going to
go back here and just change the range
to 5 for now, and let's also now go
ahead and actually print out the two
objects at the end of the program. So
we've got the get sizeof function call,
which we're going to leave in there.
We're going to print this out as well, so
we'll do a print big_range
and print big_list, and just to be
consistent let's also change this commented
out range to five as well. Alright,
run it again. So big_range,
in this case, is 88 bytes,
bearing in mind it may be different on
your operating system - you might get a
number between 72 and 88. The point is,
it's the same as it was when I ran it last
time, and unsurprisingly, big
underscore list is a lot smaller now because
it's storing fewer values. And looking at the
two lines of output that we've generated
here, down the bottom, big underscore
range is a generator object based on the
my underscore range function that we
wrote. A big underscore list though, as
you can see, is just a list and contains
the values we'd expect from a range of
five. So what's the my_range
function doing and what's this yield
statement that we worked on on line
seven? What's that actually doing? What's
that all about?
Well when you write a normal function,
the function finishes after returning
a result. You can see that if we change
this yield and change that keyword to
return, and we get this warning here
that the code is unreachable,
unsurprisingly, because return is
actually returning the execution back
to the calling code. Now if we go ahead
and actually run that because that was
just a warning, we end up with an error -
the type error down the bottom there - int
object is not iterable. That's because we
can't iterate over an int. The point is
that the my_range now returns a
single value then stops, as opposed to
what it was returning before. The other
thing to note though down here, you can
see in the output, the big underscore
range now is only 24 bytes, noting
that the last few times I ran it it was
88, and might have been a number between
72 and 88 in your operating system.
The point is it's a different value to
what it was when it was previously ran.
So as well as that change in behavior to just
return one value then stop, there's
something going on with the structure of
the my_range object as well. now
when it's a generator and uses yield, it
actually takes up a bit more memory. So if
we change line 7 again, back to what it
was, to yield, of course that warning goes
away. The difference is that when we
use yield, the function actually returns
the yielded value, then goes into a sort
of suspended state. So it doesn't just
return the value - it keeps track of all
its variables and whereabouts in its
code, it is. So the next time it's called,
it wakes up and continues from where it
left off. So looking at this code on line
12, the function call,
you might be thinking it only gets
called once, but in fact it's called each
time it's iterated over in the loop on
line 18, down here. And we can see that
better by adding some diagnostic print
statements, so let's go ahead and do that.
So come up here to the my_range
function. Let's add some code to print
out. So print parentheses double quote
my_range starts, and we'll
also put one in the while statement, after
the while start less than n
statement, or line.
Then we'll do print parentheses double
quotes my_range is returning,
then left and right curly braces, dot
format then start. And if we actually
run this and have a look at the output,
you can actually see that, in that case,
my_range starts then we're
getting a value 0 1 2 3 4. So clearly, it's
been called five times. Now it doesn't
quite show the full story, though. Now I
said you might think that my underscore
range is only called once, on what was
line 12, but is now line 14,
but it's not actually called on that
line. So to see what's really going on a
bit better, we can pause the program by
getting it to wait for input at various
points. So let's go ahead and do that and
that should
make things a little bit clearer. So I'm going
to go back up here onto line 12, and I'm
going to put underscore equals input and
parentheses and then double quotes, line
12. Then I'm going to come down to line 15.
Let's take a copy of that line 12, paste
it in to line 15 but then we'll change
the reference to line 15, and make sure
that we've deleted the extra line there.
Let's also add a third one. We'll come
down here after the big_list.
Let's go ahead and do that for line 22 - so
line 22. Then lastly, within the for loop
itself, let's actually put one in there.
So that's going to be line 24. So I'm
going to make that line 24 and just
to be clear,
we'll add some extra text inside loop.
Okay. So we're using an underscore, by the
way, on lines 12, 15, 22 and 24. That's our
using that as a variable name in here
because that's a Python convention, and
indicates that we're not interested in
the value of the variable. What we're
doing is, we're just using those input
statements to get the program to wait
until we press ENTER. Now if you're also
programming in Java, don't use a single
underscore as a variable name in Java,
and stop doing it if you currently are.
Now it's valid in Java 8, but it's
being removed in Java 9. Now it's
an accepted convention in Python but
doesn't translate well to
practically all other languages. Alright,
so now that we've added those input
lines, let's actually run the program to
see how it behaves now. Okay, so
down here we've got, waiting on
line 12, and you can see there's no
output at this point - just waiting until
enter is pressed. So when I press
ENTER, it's come back and said it's
stopped, or it's actually stopped again on
line 15. So the big range equals my
underscore range, here on line 14. Well
that's already been executed, but notice
that nothing else is printed at this
stage - just the input prompt. So in other
words, my_range, the function, hasn't
been executed at this point. Now you
wouldn't normally include this line in
code - you'd just use my_range
five in the four loop. In other words,
this is sort of an extra line there - you
just go straight down to here, and you
put my_range there on line 23
direct in the for loop itself. We've got
it here so you can check the size of the
object but it's really not necessary, and,
in fact, it can even be a bad idea and
I'm going to show you why shortly. Now if
I just continue on though, back in the
run window. If I press ENTER again, you
can see it stopped on line 22 just
before the for loop starts. But now it
gets interesting. We press ENTER again
and we've entered the for loop. Now you
can see that this was the first time,
looking at the output, that my underscore
range gets called, when the first value
is actually needed. So we get the message,
my underscore range starts, which of
course we put up at the start of the function,
and the first value, in this case zero,
is returned. Now pressing enter again, and
the next value is returned and notice
that my underscore range doesn't start
again at the beginning. It's continuing
from line eight, and you can see line 8 on
the screen there. So we don't get the
start message printed again. Now each
time I press ENTER, the next value is
returned until the generator runs out of
values to return and the loop exits. And
I'll just go ahead and do that, and you
can see our program is now all closed. So
the loop went around five times, so the
line 24 inside loop prompt was displayed
five times. Alright, so let's end the
video here. In the next video, we'll go
ahead and start talking more about this
generator, and add some extra code to
this method to clear things up. So I'll
see you in the next video.